this for many of you will be the most
important podcast episode I've ever
recorded and I don't usually ask you to
do this but in this case I'm going to
ask you to please listen to this entire
episode if you can and if you have the
opportunity to do so if there's
something in your life that you've
struggled with something you've
struggled to change that goal you've had
that you've never quite managed to
attain then this episode was made for
you I've been inundated with messages
over the last couple of weeks as we
approach the New Years and these
messages all seem to express slight
variations of the same critical question
which is how do I make and break habits
in 2023 our lives are quite simply a
manifestation of our habits the things
we repeatedly do so as many of you have
correctly identified if we can change
those habits we can make and break
behaviors take control of our lives and
finally achieve our most important goals
and in my life
all of the good things have come after
me breaking a habit that's had me
trapped in sort of a limiting sometimes
toxic cycle in my life and so habits and
studying how they're made and how we
make and break them with Will has been
one of the most important realizations
in my life and in the research of this
this particular podcast episode I spent
weeks researching and reading every book
that I could on the science of making
and breaking habits and in this episode
I'm going to tell you everything that I
learned everything that you need to know
from the most up-to-date scientific
research on habits and changing Behavior
and I do this in the hope that one of
you even one of you I think it'd be
worthwhile if I I land this effect on
one of you one of you can change
Behavior you've wanted to change and
therefore take control of a habit and
therefore change your life
multiple scientific Studies have found
that most people give up their New
Year's resolutions within a month and
according to a recent American study of
the 41 of Americans who made New Year's
resolution by the end of the year only
nine percent were successful in keeping
it nine percent that means if you make a
New Year's resolution at the start of
the Year by the end of the year only
nine percent of you have achieved it I
know this might make you not believe in
New Year's resolutions it might make you
think they're pointless but the study
also reveal something that suggests
otherwise six months after setting a new
year's resolution 46 of people who made
a resolution were still successful in
achieving it they still had the good
habits going compared to just four
percent of people who made a similar
goal that wasn't a New Year's resolution
that's a 1050 increase in the
probability of you achieving your goal
after six months if you set it as an
Year's resolution similarly research by
psychologist John Norcross a very famous
American psychologist has found that
resolution makers are more than 10 times
as successful in changing their behavior
is people who want to change but don't
have a formal resolution now I used to
be in the camp of thinking that
resolutions were an excuse for not
making change earlier in the year but
clearly there is something supported by
science and psychology that's happening
in terms of an intention setting that's
actually making New Year's resolutions
important but this podcast is not just
about New Year's resolutions this is
about goal setting generally and
breaking and making habits and as I said
12 months after you've set that New
Year's resolution just that nine percent
of people are still successful in their
resolution so this podcast episode is
also about purely making sure that you
are part of that successful nine percent
by giving you all the science and all
the information that you need to be part
of that nine percent almost 50 percent
of you will be successful six months
after your resolution but most of you
will fail in the next six months the
question is why
and I think
I know the answer
[Music]
pages of books and studies on habits and
goals and New Year's resolutions
it's clear to me that the first place to
start is by explaining exactly what a
habit is in the most simple way
but clearly habits are behaviors wired
so deeply in our brains that we perform
them almost automatically so why do we
have habits well they are very handy
prehistoric devices that our ancestors
have given us because decision making
and thinking itself consume so much time
and energy and the truth is if you never
made habits you would be spending so
much time in mental energy on routine
things like how do I get to work in the
morning or how do I get from the kitchen
in my house to the living room in my
house and if you used all of your time
on that you wouldn't have the capacity
to solve unique daily challenges many of
which Once Upon a Time presented a real
life or death threat so your brain
created habits which are neurological
Pathways that fire together so
frequently and successfully that your
brain wired them together to save you
time and energy once habits are formed
they're encoded in your brain
forever and this for me was a real
Revelation from reading through all the
research people tend to believe that
they can make a bad habit disappear for
good the science suggests otherwise let
me tell you a story about some rats in a
maze and what this recently uncovered
about how we can make and break habits
picture the human brain as an onion
composed of Leia upon a layer of cells
most of our complex thinking the things
that we really ponder over and the
things that really trouble us happen on
the outermost layers of the brain that's
the part of the brain that you're using
to listen to me right now on the
evolutionary time scale the outermost
layer was added fairly recently but as
you go deep inside the brain towards the
center of the skull you'll find this
golf ball-sized lump of tissues and this
is called the basil ganglia and this is
where all of your habits are stored for
ease and just so I don't have to
pronounce that difficult word again I'm
going to call this your habit control
center your habit control room and
because it's a such a prehistoric part
of the brain that same habit control
center can be found inside the brain of
rats as well so in order to study the
Habit control room world-leading
researchers from MIT conducted
experiments with rats where they
monitored the rat's brains and put them
inside a t-shaped maze with some
delicious chocolate hidden somewhere
inside the maze the first time the rat
was put into the maze it would wander up
and down the center Isle sniffing
corners and scratching at the walls it
could smell the chocolate but it
couldn't quite figure out how to find it
when it reached the top of the tea in
the Maze it often turned to the right
away from the chocolate and then
wandered left sometimes pausing for no
obvious reason at all eventually in all
the studies the animal found the
chocolate but there was no clear pattern
in the search the wandering behavior
that happened before that on the surface
it looked like each rat was taking a
leisurely unthinking casual stroll but
when they look at brain scans of those
rats at that exact moment it tells a
completely different story while each
animal wandered through the maze for the
first time its brain in particular that
habit control center in the core of the
brain was working on overdrive each time
a rat sniffed the air or scratched the
wall its brain exploded with activity as
if it was analyzing each new sand each
new site in each new sound and although
the rat looked calm the rat's brain was
ferociously processing everything but
once the rat had found the chocolate
once when placed back into the maze the
brain activity completely disappeared
the rat was now on autopilot it no
longer needed to process things it no
longer needed to think a habit had been
formed so the habit control center takes
over seemingly automatically retrieving
the stored information on how to get
from where it is at the start of the
maze to the chocolate and as if
possessed by the Habit control center
the rat glided straight to the chocolate
without pause in the same way that we
all Glide unconsciously to work or to
the gym or to that familiar part of the
house where without thinking every
single morning when we wake up without
having to consider the directions to get
there so because the rat was on
autopilot its brain was freed up to
think about other things so
theoretically the rat could Glide to the
chocolate while also pondering a complex
problem it was having it worked that day
by navigating the maze over and over the
rats formed what scientists now call a
habit Loop and there are three steps in
a habit Loop step one is you need a cue
which in this case was a click sound
they played when they dropped the rat
into the maze this Q in turn makes the
Habit control center activate the stored
routine and step two is a routine the
routine for the rats was the walk
through the maze towards the chocolate
and step three is you need a reward
which is of course the delicious
chocolate at the end of the maze the Q
routine reward is the Habit Loop The
Habit Loop happens to be the same for
humans also I've mentioned this over the
years before but my father smoked for 30
years of his life but he only ever
smoked in the car never at parties never
at home never at work only in the car
and in all honesty it would really upset
me because I think I grew up with this
kind of existential feeling or worry
that my dad was going to die someday
because he smoked because I'd heard all
you know all the things they say about
smoking in the carcinogens and why it's
bad for you so seeing your father do
that was quite troubling for me as a as
a young man and I tried I think in
subtle ways to encourage him to quit
but nothing seemed to work until one day
something I accidentally did led to him
making the decision to quit smoking
forever
his Q routine reward habit Loop is a
prime example of everything I've said he
would sit in the car and the car itself
was the queue sometimes cues are just
context for environment and that cue
caused a neurological pathway in its
brain to begin to fire up in his habit
control center his brain and seemingly
without thinking as if possessed he
would automatically reach down into the
car door and pull out his packet of
miniature cigars which was his routine
that reached down was his routine like
the rats walking through the Maze and
then he'd wind the window down and light
one up and the nicotine which releases a
a feel-good chemical in the brain called
dopamine in under just 20 seconds was
the reward Q craving routine reward but
then one day when I was 18 years old
after dropping out of University to
build my first tech startup I was
reading a book called hooked by niril
who's a previous guest on this podcast
that explains how big social media
companies and tech companies get their
users to form the habit of using their
products every day and become addicted
to their products every day by use using
the same habit Loop while I was reading
that book I happened to stop off at home
back in the southwest in Plymouth and I
accidentally left it in my father's
bathroom now for whatever reason like
many of us my dad loves to read while
he's on the toilet and so he ends up
picking up the book learning about that
habit Loop and finally understanding the
cue routine and reward that was causing
him to smoke and so he went into his car
some weeks later he didn't actually tell
me this until months after he'd quit
smoking he went into his car took the
cigarettes out and put these miniature
lollipops these little Chopper Chopper
lollipops in the Cigar Case in the place
where it was and my father after that
never smoked ever again The Habit Loop
had been interrupted a new less
addictive habit had been formed in its
place and within that my father's Health
outcomes had drastically improved going
back to the original point about how
just nine percent of us will
successfully keep Honey's resolutions I
think the study with the rats the Maize
and the chocolate may explain why you've
probably heard the phrase old habits die
hard and from the scientific perspective
that couldn't be more true I think this
is good news feel good habits I think
this is probably bad news for your bad
habits in that study with the rats
researchers eventually removed the
chocolate and the Rats still ran exactly
the same way through the maze the
researchers went one step further then
and poisoned the chocolate with a
chemical that makes the brain of the Rat
experience nausea and the Rats still ran
the exact same way through the maze even
though they stopped eating the chocolate
experiencing the reward at the end of it
the routine was still the same the queue
was still the same interestingly the
researchers then found a way to
interfere with the rat's brain and shut
off that automatic habit Loop that was
causing it to take the left Journey
Through The Maze and it worked instead
of running left through the maze the
rats started to run right through the
maze but then interestingly when the
researchers interfered with the rat's
brain again and disabled that habit Loop
of turning right through the Amaze the
rats instantaneously went back to the
previous habit of running left through
the Maze and they did it at the same
speed certainty and accuracy as they'd
done it previously once they'd learned
that habit they didn't need to learn the
old pathway through the maze once again
and their brain scan showed that they
weren't thinking about it they were back
on autopilot and researchers were
shocked because what this says and I
quote the researchers quote the original
habit had never ever really been
forgotten it was always lurking
somewhere there in their brain and I
think ladies and gentlemen this might be
one of the biggest misconceptions that
people have about habits you never get
rid of them
they're never forgotten you know the
same is true about so many things in our
lives I reflect on that and think about
some of the traumatic experiences I've
had that evidence remains ingrained in
our brain because it's useful for us
it's like if you go back maybe thousands
of years
knowing that a lion was something to run
from was something that was important
for your cognition to never forget and
this for me also explains why 91 of us
that saturnia's resolution to form a new
habit or to create a new Behavior
will fail within 12 months habits can't
be broken but this is the good news they
can be forgotten and they can be
replaced the scientists in the wrapped
maze chocolate study said and I quote
these results suggest that the brain can
quickly toggle between an old habit and
a new habit what's really stunning is
that old habits are totally intact and
retrievable in an instant habits can be
broken they can be replaced but they
can't be removed forever
so when you think about the Habit Loop
and the queue routine reward cycle it
becomes really clear why 91 of people
won't keep their New Year's resolutions
and why 25 of us won't even keep the
resolution for one week
because they're old bad habits are still
there
they never die
and the same cues are still there in
their lives whether it's an
environmental cue like my dad or it's a
chemical cue in the case of my former
partner where every time we went for a
glass of wine she got the craving to go
for a cigarette and the routine is of
course the same you know the cigars are
still there in my dad's car door or the
the Suites are still there in the draw
downstairs in my house and the rewards
on offer are all the same to an equally
delicious and compelling so it's all
well and good understanding this and
even interrupting the Habit cycle like
my dad successfully did with those
lollipops in the in the car draw but the
answer to sustaining a new habit is more
complicated to get those new
neurological Pathways to fire together
and therefore wire together scientific
studies conducted All Around the World
in humans and animals say that you need
just a little bit more
one thing we need and all the science
was clear on this is we need a
repetition you've heard this before some
studies say 21 days to form a new habit
some studies say 66 days the truth is
and I read a real plethora of research
is it seems to depend for some people it
happens in a shorter period of time for
some people depending on the Habit
depending on who you are it can take up
to hundreds of days to form the new
habit the director of the University of
Oregon social and effective Neuroscience
lab Elliot Berkman said since habits
take practice and repetition to form the
same is true when it comes to breaking
them in order to break those unwanted
habits and make new ones whatever
they're going to be I'm going to give
you the five rules of making and
breaking habits that have the most
scientific evidence to support them from
what I've found the things that
resonated with me the most that I
honestly didn't know with these five
rules in mind you'll drastically I
believe drastically increase your
chances of breaking any bad habit that
you have and making any new habit that
you desire to have so rule number one
stress is your puppet master many habits
as I'm sure you can relate including
smoking or excessive sugar consumption
involve the brain's dopamine or reward
system and dopamine if you understand
what that chemical is is a feel-good
chemical that transmits signals between
neurons in the brain the first time you
engage in a new rewarding Behavior you
get a euphoric feeling from doing it as
a result of that dopamine release this
leads to changes in both the connections
between neurons in the brain and the
system responsible for action and can
largely account for why we start to form
bad habits in the first place or habits
that we are we don't necessarily want
many of these rewarding things like
sugar or substances
um are powerful and chemically addictive
as well which means the Habit is even
harder to unanchor and our psychological
reaction to them in this day and age can
be linked all the way back to evolution
in the caveman days in the cave woman
days meat wasn't salted there wasn't
such a thing is candy or sweets and
highly addictive substances like tobacco
have only been growing in the wild for
nearly 8 000 years but it wasn't until
about 2 000 years ago that we started
picking tobacco up and chewing it and
smoking it Russell poldrack who's the
professor of psychology at Stanford
University says our brains are not well
equipped to deal with the big rush one
gets from these sorts of things and if
you just look at the High Street around
you humans are quite clearly designed
our entire society around activities
that will give us this habit-forming
dopamine response in our brains if you
go into a corner shop I can get crisps
again that releases dopamine sweets
adult magazines
cigars cigarettes booze and they sell so
well because they cause that
all-important dopamine release in our
brain which acts as the reward part of
the Habit Loop so we keep on coming back
to the corner shop for more and more and
more which means more shops have popped
up on the High Street catering to that
addictive habit Loop and that reward
part of the Habit Loop and if you think
about your High Street most of the shops
are selling sugar
caffeine or highly processed foods for
this very reason and I've always
wondered if highly processed foods like
french fries pizzas cheesecakes all of
my favorite things milkshakes trigger
the same neurological habit Loopers
smoking or other addictive drugs and new
findings published in the journal of
clinical nutrition finally suggest that
they do scientists studied a group of
overweight men between the ages of 18
and 35 years old the men were given
similar milkshakes however one had a
high glycemic index and then one had a
low glycemic index the glycemic index is
basically an indicator of how fast blood
sugar glucose levels Spike after
consuming certain foods carbohydrates
such as cookies and baked goods and
pasta and white bread and white rice all
have a high glycemic index they're
quickly digested while low glycemic
carbohydrates which include whole grains
and vegetables and fruits and legumes
and unprocessed grains are broken down
in a much slower way four hours after
the two groups of men were given the
milkshakes they had an MRI brain scan
which analyzed the activity in that
reward part of the brain and subjects in
the experiment who consume the high
glycemic milkshakes had spikes in their
blood sugar levels which then plummeted
four hours later and as their blood
glucose levels decreased those
participants developed excessive hunger
and their brain scans demonstrated high
levels of activity in a region of the
brain which is associated with
addiction and this really brings me to a
point from that professor at Stamford
where he said you're more likely to do
the thing you don't want to do when
you're stressed out I.E you're more
likely to go in search of that dopamine
hit in the form of sugar processed food
Drugs porn alcohol whatever it might be
if you're stressed out therefore one of
the most unobvious but important things
you can do to make a new habit stick and
form enough repetitions in that early
phase to make the neurons fire together
and wire together is to keep your stress
levels low especially in that critical
early phase while you're forming that
new habit Loop I.E if you're trying to
form a new habit whatever it might be go
to the gym whatever it might be and if
you want to be in that nine percent of
people that have achieved their New
Year's resolution 12 months from now
don't just focus on the habit focus on
your stress because high stress levels
are one of the forces acting against
your willpower as it relates to habits
and I think we can all relate I think we
can all sort of intuitively know that
when we're stressed we tend to reverse
back to bad habits and that's exactly
why they've proven this over and over
again in studies that stressed people
make bad choices as they go in that
desperate search of things that will
make them feel good in the short term
and because of this stress people are
very bad at delaying gratification
and being able to delay gratification as
I've come to learn in my own life is one
of the real keys of achieving any goal
we have in you know life business
relationships health or Fitness so what
is delayed gratification I've heard that
word for most of my life but what what
is it and why is it important what is
the research what are the studies that
prove the importance of it how do I do
it well the definition of delayed
gratification according to science is
the ability to delay an Impulse for an
immediate reward to receive a more
favorable reward at a later time and and
just on that point of delayed
gratification and how important it is
one of the most important studies I've
ever read was from the 1960s a famous
Stanford Professor named Walter Michelle
began conducting a series of important
studies around the concept of delayed
gratification during his experiments
Michelle and his team tested hundreds of
children most of them between the ages
of four and five years old and he
revealed what we now believe to be one
of the most important characteristics of
success not just in health not just in
work but also in life and they called
this this is a very famous experiment so
I imagine most of you will know this
experiment they called this the
marshmallow experiment I think certain
TV shows in America have mimicked this
and it's really quite funny to watch I
remember it when it went viral a form of
it went viral on social media a couple
years ago the experiment began
by bringing each child into a private
room and sitting them down on a chair
and placing one marshmallow on the table
in front of them the child was then
given a choice by the researcher the
researcher said I'm gonna leave the room
for a while and I'll come back in and
you can eat this tasty marshmallow if
you want to if that's your choice but if
you don't want to eat it and you if you
don't eat it I'll give you a second one
when I come back in so the choice was
simple one treat right now or two treats
when the researcher comes back in later
the research left the room for 15
minutes some kids as you can imagine
jumped up and put that marshmallow
straight in their mouth they'd eaten it
before he'd even left the room others
quite hilariously struggled around in
their chair and tried to restrain
themselves from eating it but eventually
gave in a few minutes later
and finally a few of the children did
manage to wait the entire time
and this study became known as the
marshmallow experiment but it wasn't the
funny reactions that made it famous the
mind-blowing and fascinating part came
many many years later as the years
rolled past and those same children
became fully formed adults the
researchers conducted a follow-up
experiment and they tracked each child's
progress in a number of different areas
of their life and what they found was
astonishing the children who were
willing to delay gratification and
waited to receive the second marshmallow
from the researcher ended up having
higher exam scores later in life they
ended up having lower levels of
substance abuse lower likelihoods of
childhood obesity better social skills
as reported by their parents and friends
and generally better scores in most
areas across their entire lives and
importantly the kids that didn't reach
for the marshmallow and became
successful adults also had much better
responses to stress they were likely
less stressed kids and they were
probably less stressed adults and it's
interesting to try and establish
causation between their
clearly stress undermines our ability to
regulate impulsivity stress hijacks the
brain and if you're stressed you won't
be able to delay gratification you will
continue to reach for those marshmallows
and you might not therefore achieve your
goals the researchers in the marshmallow
experiment continue to follow each child
for more than 40 years and year over
year over year the group who waited
patiently for the second marshmallow
succeeded in every capacity of their
lives that they were measuring in other
words the series of experiments proved
that our ability to delay gratification
was critical for success in life in our
love lives in our work and we know that
stress is a key factor preventing us
from delaying gratification you'll see
this everywhere in your life I've seen
it in mine if you're able to delay the
gratification of buying sweets or
desserts or cake or ice cream on your
way home from work that increases your
chance of eating healthier when you get
home and there's countless other
examples therefore and this is I guess
my big conclusion
therefore and this is not obvious but at
the start of your journey to creating
that new habit you have to focus on the
simple stuff that makes your life as
stress-free as possible and those
foundations are it's been proven by
science more sleep exercise regularly
and opt for stress reduction techniques
like meditation or massages or walking
or running or whatever helps you to
deregulate de-stress decompress because
scientists have shown that that alone
will increase your willpower and
drastically improve your chances of
cementing new habits and achieving your
big goals in your life and it's funny
because most people wouldn't think of
sleep as an important factor in
achieving most of their habits but the
science seems to be incredibly clear on
this according to World leading sleep
expert and neurologist Kathy Goldstein
sleep plays a major factor in the
success or failure of the most popular
New Year's resolutions for those trying
to lose weight or to eat healthier a
lack of sleep decreases leptin which is
the hormone that makes you feel full it
also boosts something called Girling aka
the hunger hormone which increases
appetite promotes fat storage and call
causes poor food choices and for those
of you like me that have goals
associated with work and becoming better
in your work or you want to get a
promotion or whatever it might be the
science is clear a lack of sleep reduces
your productivity and additionally sleep
deprived people in management roles are
described as less ethical not as alert
not as motivated and not as cheerful and
for those of you that might want to
boost your your social lives a lack of
sleep contributes to poor mood markedly
worse social interactions in all of the
studies and for those looking to quit
smoking like my dad a lack of sleep is
tied to higher rates of nicotine
dependency sleep is one of these
foundations that we often Overlook and
it's become a huge priority in my life
so if you want to make or break a new
habit rule number one in my five rules
is to forget all the complicated tips
and tricks and hacks and focus on those
Basics you'll succeed if you feel good
if you're not over stressed and if
you've slept quick one Intel are now one
of the sponsors on this podcast and in
the coming weeks I'm going to be telling
you about the V Pro platform Intel V Pro
is built for business essentially what
this means to me is that it's built for
a hybrid working mode perfect for my
businesses as we quite literally are
working all over the world in offices in
co-working spaces in airports and the
vpro platform has been super helpful in
allowing me to connect and collaborate
seamlessly with all of my teams all
around the world all of the time it
truly makes hybrid working far easier so
it's something that I think businesses
will all be able to benefit from for me
the benefits are second to none it's
industry-leading performance makes it
the perfect solution for any business so
if you'd like to find out more and I
really think you should head to
intel.co.ukvpro and let me know how you
get on
quick one from our longest standing
sponsor hero I I can't tell you over the
last I'd say over the last really it's
been about two and a half years it was
really um post pandemic how much my
health has become such a huge priority
in my life huel has been probably the
most important important partner in my
health Journey because
I've been in the boardrooms I've been to
their offices
tens and tens and tens and tens of times
I've seen how they make their decisions
on nutrition and that's why it's such a
wonderful thing to be able to talk to
this audience about a brand and a
product that is so unbelievably linked
to my values and the place I am in my
life of valuing the gym exercise
movement my mind my breathing and all of
those things and most importantly my
nutrition that is the role fuel plays
and so every time I get to read these
ads I do it with such passion because I
really really believe every word I'm
saying and I absolutely love the brand
so if you haven't already tried heal and
you've been resistant to my my pestering
then give it a go and let me know how
you get on
rule number two
know your cues incredibly important and
often overlooked as we've said
previously and as you know I've
indicated from that rap maze chocolate
experiment but also an example of my
father and my ex-girlfriend habits have
three main parts acute a routine and a
reward
cues are often just a context where you
tend to engage in that behavior so if
you want to break a habit step number
one has to be getting crystal clear on
exactly what your cues are if you're
aware of it you're empowered to do
something about it because the science
shows that you're most likely to relapse
to an old bad habit in the context of
when you usually perform that bad habit
knowing your cues and your triggers can
help you to avoid them and scientists
say that if a smoker disposes of a queue
like it could be an item a q item like
an ashtray or something like that that
reminds them of that habit they're
significantly more likely to give up
smoking so with this in mind
capitalizing on a major life change can
also help you to break or make unhealthy
habits
often people think like when you're
moving to a new city or starting a new
job or you're you know joining a new
social environment we might think that's
bad timing to start thinking about
making new habits because we're so busy
but science suggests the complete
opposite think about it if our cues come
from our environment usually your
current environment is full of hundreds
of different cues and triggers your home
your commute your dog walk your social
context even your friends collectively
all of those environmental factors
probably hold hundreds maybe even
thousands of cues and triggers that lead
to routines that get you rewards and
those cues and triggers and routines and
rewards those cues are holding your bad
habits in place so if you're used to
lighting up a cigarette on your way home
from work for instance or stopping off
at that fast food spot on your way home
from work moving to a new city gives you
a chance to break that cue it removes
the queue which means that you can
remove the routine and hopefully the
reward
and that's something that I
that I think about a lot which is
whenever I change my environment whether
it's moving into a new place or going to
a new city or making new friends or
doing something new how can I use that
sort of blank canvas as a as a way to
start creating new habits can I put my
fitness shoes in a certain obvious place
so that I'm cute every day to go to the
gym can I remove the sweet drawer from
my house completely and replace it with
a healthy drawer full of vegetables and
fruits those kinds of things and also
when we go to new places when we spend
time abroad for prolonged periods of
time that's a great opportunity despite
what people tend to think to really kick
start new habits and to shed old ones
rule number three don't focus on
stopping bad habits focus on replacing
them it is and I've experienced this
over and over again in my life it's
impossibly difficult to actually stop a
habit
um so I I delved into the science to try
and figure out why and what happens when
we try and stop doing a bad habit and
the science shows that focusing too much
on stopping something often makes you
rebound eventually and do it more we are
action-orientated creatures not in
action orientated creatures and some
Studies have shown that the more you
suppress your thoughts the more likely
you are to think about those things over
and over again and therefore revert back
to a bad habit one study done in 2008 on
the topic of appetite found that those
who suppressed their thoughts about
eating chocolate exhibited behavioral
rebound effects where they consumed
significantly more chocolate than those
who didn't and I'll tell you what I can
relate I can think of multiple times in
my life where I've made a pledge to
myself to quit something and because I'm
so focused on quitting that thing when I
eventually break maybe because I'm
stressed maybe because of another factor
I end up swinging so far the other way
because I've sort of held myself away
from that thing that I craved and
similarly a 2010 study published in the
psychological science found that smokers
who tried to restrain their thoughts
about smoking ultimately wound up
thinking about smoking even more and
this reminds me of a small piece of
advice my driving instructor said to me
when I was 18 years old 19 years old he
said Stephen the car goes where your
eyes are looking if you want to avoid
crashing into the cars on the side of
the road don't focus on the cars on the
side of the road because you're Veer
towards the park cars on the side of the
road so look forward into the distance
where you want the car to go and this
seems like a fairly fitting analogy for
what we're talking about and for the
Third Law of breaking and making habits
you end up doing the thing you're
focusing on so don't focus on stopping
smoking focus on the behavior you want
to replace it with the director of the
University of Oregon social and
effective Neuroscience lab Elliot
Berkman who I mentioned earlier he said
something which is really really
pertinent to this he said if you're a
smoker and you tell yourself not to
smoke your brain still hears smoke
conversely if you tell yourself to chew
gum every time you want a cigarette your
brain has a more positive
action-orientated goal to focus on and
this explains why those miniature
lollipops that my dad put in the side of
the car when he quit smoking was such a
good idea he didn't just take the
cigarettes out of the car altogether
which might have caused him to rebound
and think about them a lot he replaced
them with a new action-orientated habit
for his brain to latch onto and focus on
which in his case was of course sucking
lollipops similarly scientists suggest
that if 5 PM for example has been linked
to that glass of wine that you've been
trying to knock for a while
don't just remove the glass of wine from
your life instead double down on
hydration and make sure the fridge is
stocked with seltzers and cold water and
lemon just like my dad did but as I said
at the start of this podcast doing this
just once won't be enough forming a new
habit takes time and commitment so don't
feel discouraged if it takes longer than
you might expect I remember looking at
the because I think we've all grown up
in this world where they say that
forming a new habit takes 20 something
days people have repeated this to be
over and over again it takes 20
something days I think when I started
doing the keto diet for a little while
people said to me just do it for 25 days
and you'll be you know the Habit will
stick
so I looked into some of the sites
around this and a 2010 study published
in the European Journal of Social
Psychology found it took an average of
66 days for a behavior to change but as
I said at the start this varies wildly
for some people it's 20 days and in some
cases it was 250 days so I think that's
largely BS and I think the more
important thing is actually going to be
revealed in rule number five of these
five rules but before we get to number
five which really was a light bulb
Epiphany moment for me I'm going to give
you rule number four for forming making
and breaking the habits you want to in
2023 rule number four is you need a
better reason to quit
neuroscientists have shown that even if
you replace a quote-unquote bad habit
with a better one sometimes the original
habit will have a much stronger
biological reward than the thing you've
substituted it for and if you think
about what I said earlier
the habit's always going to be there so
even if you substitute it
like the scientists said in the rat
experiment it can so easily just toggle
back it never disappears the pathway the
neurons are fired together they all
wired together for example in the case
of my dad who I keep mentioning
throughout this podcast his brain
obviously knows that the lollipop is not
as addictive as the nicotine he's
getting from those cigars and therefore
it won't produce the same euphoric
neurological feeling in the reward
centers of his brain as those cigars did
but this is where the importance of
having an intrinsic motivation comes
into play and listen an intrinsic
motivation is a phrase any Avid listener
of this podcast has probably had me say
a lot the word intrinsic is one of my
favorite phrases it's basically a reason
for doing something that is genuinely
and personally important to you not
something that you're doing for external
Rewards or payment we call that an
extrinsic motivation and for me and
you've heard me bangling about this
um because it genuinely changed my life
my reason for getting healthy and
cutting junk food out of my diet was
always shallow as I've said before I
wanted to have a six-pack for summer so
for the first few months of every single
year when I made that New Year's
resolution I would work out every single
day and I would eat healthy food
obsessively until one of two things
happened until either
I got in shape or until
summer ended
then I would immediately revert back
like those rats who started running left
again I would immediately revert back to
my old habit of eating junk food and
avoiding any form of exercise and it
wasn't until 2020 when a certain virus
spread across the world tragically
killing millions of people in every
corner of the world that I got to see
as the most
imprinting alarming example how fragile
health is and how fragile life is and
that's when if I think about it now
that's when things changed in my mind I
realized like a wonderful
Epiphany that my health and fitness were
the most important thing in my life
because it is literally the the First
Foundation I've said this before think
of it like this table everything you
care about sits on this table your
career your family your goals all of
your future dreams everything now you
can remove any of the things on the
table and you still have everything else
I can God forbid get rid of my dog Pablo
and I still have everything else on the
table I can get rid of my career and I
still have everything else that's on the
table but if I get rid of the table
everything else Falls I lose everything
my health is the table my health is my
first Foundation everything in my life
is contingent on it so logically it must
be every single day when I wake up in
the morning it must be my first priority
and that one realization changed my life
it gave me like this
huge powerful intrinsic reason to focus
on my health which was not just six
packs and abs and chasing women or
whatever it might be and now we sit here
three years later when I'm in the best
shape of my life I've managed to kind of
stick at it of course I have ups and
downs and Peaks and troughs and whatever
else and some days where I'm you know in
the draw at 2AM eating too much
chocolate or whatever we're all human
none of us are perfect and I think it's
important to communicate that
um I have all the same struggles you
know some days my motivation's low some
days it's a bit higher but if if we zoom
out and I think that's the key if we
zoom out I've made drastically healthier
choices I'm in the best shape of my life
I've cut out a lot of the things that I
know are bad for me
and that really had a bad impact on my
body and my mind
um and that's all because I finally got
a better reason and my point here is
sometimes
your good habits don't stand a chance
because you don't have a good enough
reason like me you want a six-pack and
you want it for bad reasons one of my
favorite quotes of all time is change
happens when the pain of staying the
same becomes greater than the pain of
making a change I.E people don't change
until it's easier to change than it is
to stay the same
and unfortunately
this means people sometimes need a real
Health scare they need a death in their
family or some kind of other tragedy
until they have a strong enough reason
strong enough evidence to make a change
and that is tremendously sad it's been
the case for me too many times in my
life that I've had to lose something
to make a change I've had to lose
something to learn the value of it um
for me the events of 2020 were that
tragedy I said you know I sincerely hope
that
you guys that are listening to this
won't need a tragedy of your own to
realize what truly matters to you
um or to give you that intrinsic
motivation to live more aligned with the
with the person you want to be in the
values that you have
rule number five maybe the most
important I'll let you decide rule
number five and this is again slightly
controversial slightly unconventional
is willpower is not enough this is maybe
the most fascinating study I read of all
of them because it really made me Ponder
and it kind of disrupted my thinking on
Willpower and strength and
um mental strength and motivation
and it's probably a huge reason why 91
of people don't stick to their
resolutions dozens of studies show that
willpower is the single most important
habit for individual success and this is
true
but
for a long time people thought that
willpower is a skill that you could
develop and that therefore remains
constant Forever Until Mark murovan a
PhD scientist argued that if willpower
is a skill
then why does it not remain constant
throughout the whole day or even
throughout the whole week why does
willpower seem to fluctuate
he conducted an experiment to prove that
willpower like all of the muscles in our
body
gets exhausted the more we use it
throughout the day in his lab he did a
fairly simple thing he set up one bowl
of freshly baked cookies and then he set
up another bowl of radishes and listen
everybody hates radishes including me
well you know put them up chop them up
put them in a salad maybe I don't hate
them they're good for you but anyway in
this example most people would prefer
hot delicious cookies than radishes
right and the participants in the study
were divided into two groups one group
was instructed to eat the delicious
cookies and ignore the radishes the
other group was instructed to ignore the
delicious cookies and to eat the
radishes I know which group I would have
rather been in after five minutes into
that experiment the researchers
re-entered the room and gave both groups
of people a puzzle but the thing is the
puzzle was impossible to complete and
here's what happened
the people that had eaten the cookie
with their unused reservoir of willpower
because they hadn't had to use their
willpower they hadn't had to use their
restraint looked way more relaxed when
they were trying to solve that
impossible puzzle and they would
continue to try and solve it over and
over and over again some worked for more
than half an hour before the researcher
told them to stop on average the cook
eaters spent almost 19 minutes trying to
solve that puzzle before they eventually
quit on average now in the case of the
radish eaters with their depleted
willpower because they they had to
practice restraint they acted completely
differently it was a completely opposite
story
they vented as they worked to try and
solve that puzzle they got frustrated
one even complained that that the whole
experiment was a waste of time some of
them put their heads on the table closed
their eyes and one of them even snapped
at the researcher when she came back in
on average the radish eaters worked for
roughly eight minutes 60 less they tried
to solve the problem of the puzzle The
Impossible puzzle for 60 percent less
time than the cookie eaters before
quitting and when I read this study I
was shocked but I'm a skeptic so I tried
to think of why this might be I tried to
think of other factors and I thought of
maybe it's the sugar maybe the sugar in
the cookies are causing them to work
harder but when you look at other
studies where there isn't sugar anytime
someone's practicing restraint the same
effects are seen willpower isn't just a
skill it's a muscle like the muscles in
your arms or your legs and it gets tired
and it gets tired as it's forced to work
harder so there's less power left over
for all of the other things and since
since that cookie study was published I
think in 1998 numerous Studies have
built a case for the exact same thing
they call it the world power depletion
theory in one incredible example which
is almost hard to believe volunteers who
are asked to suppress their feelings as
they watched an emotional movie gave up
sooner on a test that they did after of
physical stamina than volunteers who
watched the film and were allowed to
react in whatever way they wanted to so
if you were asked to restrain yourself
when you then did a physical exercise
people gave up sooner in the physical
exercise in a similar study which
pointed at the exact same conclusion
people who were asked to suppress
certain thoughts were less able to
stifle laughter in a follow-up test
which was designed to make them giggle
so if the science here is correct which
I suspect it is and willpower is a
limited resource
it's really obvious that the more
pressure and restrictions and strain you
put on yourself when you're trying to
make a new habit and break old ones the
less the chance you have of achieving
them the more chance you have of
rebounding and relapsing this is why
unsustainable crash diets just don't
work this is why anytime you feel like
you're depriving yourself of something
that you really want you nearly always
end up failing and falling into relapse
this is why in a 2014 study almost 40
percent of people so they failed on
their New Year's resolutions because the
goal was too unsustainable or
unrealistic and 10 said they failed
because they had too many goals this is
why it's so important as you think about
what goals you're setting to make sure
that they're small enough and achievable
enough to become sustainable without the
need for major sacrifice which will
deplete your willpower reserves and that
is that for me was a real Revelation
because I think about all the habits
I've tried to set you know what I'm
talked about trying to get a six-pack
for summer think about what I said I
obsessively ate healthy food I went to
the gym every day for six months my
willpower eventually became depleted and
I rebounded rebounded like a yo-yo like
you've never seen before and this is why
you shouldn't try and give up every bad
habit that you have at the same time
this is why less goals increase the
chance of completing all of your goals
because with too many big unrealistic
sacrifice-centric goals your willpower
will be under tremendous unsustainable
strain it will run out you will fail and
it will rebound and this is also why so
many psychologists and scientists have
found that the best way to create a new
habit isn't by depriving yourself of all
rewards that is totally
counterproductive according to the
science it's by finding new rewards
healthier rewards less addictive rewards
but nonetheless making sure that you
still reward yourself in some way every
day along the way
and I'm gonna do something that I didn't
plan to do I'm going to give you a bonus
rule number six because this point I've
been talking about ever since I learned
to I think I've been pestering everyone
I saw Jay Shetty earlier on and I I
peppered him with it then I saw my
assistant I peppered her with it I think
the two guys in the room recording this
podcast with me I've peppered them with
it as well
this is something that I thought was
unbelievable because it's so easy it's
so simple it's a
it's a one second exercise which the
science has shown is tremendously
effective in helping you to create a new
habit so bonus rule number six
the secret power of posing a question
I'm going to give you one last short tip
that I found buried within the
scientific research that blew my mind
and blew my mind again so much so that I
had to check it was true it's called the
question Behavior effect it's an
incredible
simple phenomenon in which asking people
about performing a certain Behavior
drastically influences whether they do
it in the future or not the effect has
been shown to last for more than six
months after you ask a simple question
you know going back to one of the real
pioneering pieces of research on this a
study published in the Journal of
consumer psychology says asking the
right question is the key to behavior
change so instead of telling someone
else what to do or if it relates to a
goal you're trying to achieve for
yourself instead of just saying what
you're going to do
for example if you want to go to the gym
instead of saying I want to go to the
gym or I'm going to go to the gym
it's way more effective according to the
science to ask yourself or a person a
simple question which is are you going
to go to the gym
across repeated psychological studies if
an individual isn't exhibiting healthy
Behavior if they're then asked a
question about that behavior
or they ask themselves a question about
their behavior it serves as a reminder
of their choices direct questions in
their studies influence people to cheat
less to exercise more to volunteer more
and to even recycle more and the key
here isn't to ask any question or to ask
it in any way it's to ask a question
which encourages a definitive yes or no
answer really interestingly researchers
found that the question Behavior effect
was most effective and most powerful
when the question was administered via
computer or a paper and pencil survey
and I guess
you're wondering why that works why why
isn't it effective to say it to somebody
why is it better when a
a medium that can't respond that has a
yes or no box on it is more effective
than asking your friend or yourself the
same question and there are several
theories about why the question Behavior
effect works but most people believe
it's related to something called
cognitive dissonance cognitive
dissonance is where your ideal self the
person you want to be
doesn't match up with your real self
which is who you actually are so
although you might want to be a healthy
person your behavior your actions might
not be aligning with that they might not
be aligning with the actions of a fit
healthy person so someone asks you the
question or if you ask yourself the
question are you going to go to the gym
today
saying no would cause a lot of mental
discomfort to ease your discomfort
you're likely going to say yes then once
you say yes your prediction that you're
going to exercise that day becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy because the
question has reminded you of who you
want to be the path to becoming that
person are you going to go to the gym
today and you've set an intention to
walk that path it's a simple question is
a reminder it delivers the path and it
gives you the opportunity to send a
clear intention to yourself and to
whoever else of what you're going to do
and the reason why this works even more
effectively when answering yes or no to
the question especially on a computer or
a pen or a paper is because these binary
choices in a yes or no box or on a
computer or on a piece of paper wherever
it might be don't allow for
clarification and excuses both of which
we all know allow us to wiggle away from
confronting the reality of who we want
to be the path of getting there and
establishing an intention well you might
want to explain you know Steve you know
I wanna I might say to myself you know I
plan on starting to exercise next month
or I'm going to stop sugar next month or
I'll go to the gym once my schedule
allows me to do so a yes or no question
doesn't give any room to create an
excuse the justification and to deceive
yourself you need to commit if it's yes
or no you need to commit one way or the
other so the next time you're tempted to
make excuses for your behavior and we
all do it I do it every day or to
lecture someone else about what they
should do differently
try this instead try asking yourself and
I did this last night it was 11 30 p.m
at night or whatever long day and I'm
sat there in my little office upstairs
and I think
I know I should go on the Peloton I've
not been on the Peloton in a little
while
um so ask myself a question said Steve
are you gonna go on the Peloton
like a bit of a weirdo I replied to
myself yes
use it on yourself ask yourself a clear
yes or no question about an area of your
life that you're struggling in
daily to find motivation and or if you
want to help someone in an empathetic
and effective way instead of saying you
should quit smoking you can raise the
question with them and ask them are you
gonna quit smoking are you going to
apply for that new job and ask them only
for a yes or no answer if you can
obviously remember to have empathy
because sometimes questions come with
them
something which isn't revealed unless
the person reads between the lines which
is judgment and we don't want to we
don't want to lead with judgment that's
not a good thing
um but raising awareness raising someone
else's awareness of their behavior with
this genital confrontation of their
ideal self can lead to significant
Behavior change
so with these six rules here's my
conclusive message to you
don't let the statistically High
likelihood of failure with your goals
and Years resolutions put you off trying
because the science also says that
resolutions are effective set yourself
up for Success using the rules in this
podcast please tell a friend if you've
got a friend in your life that is
struggling with something there's a
habit they want to make or a habit they
want to break please share this podcast
episode with them and hopefully it'll
make change in someone's life you know I
reflect on how that leaving that book at
home accidentally
had such a big accidental impact and I
give all the credit to my father for
actually doing it I accidentally left
the book somewhere which I had no
intention of helping anyone but he took
that book read it and to think an idea
helped him to stop smoking which is a
goal that he had for some people they
might love smoking and that's also fine
all of our goals are subjective
um to think that he was able to shake a
habit that was not good for his health
is much of the reason why I'm doing this
podcast which is this realization that
one idea could be any of these six
principles or something else that we've
shared today could have that effect on
someone that I'll never meet is the most
rewarding reason for staying up
it's fairly late here it's about 10 p.m
at night
um and doing this podcast so soon before
New Year's
and remember and I think this is an
important admittance life is all about
failing forward you like me in all areas
of your life will stumble you'll hit
hurdles life will happen
um that's completely inevitable but
hopefully with these principles in mind
you can pick yourself back up again and
again and again and again and you know
I've had to do this over and over again
in every habit that I've successfully
formed and the habits that I'm still
struggling to form until such a time
when the habits you're seeking to break
have been broken and the habits you're
seeking to make have been made and your
new behavior is creating the life that
you hope and desire to live
this is a never-ending Journey which is
something that I've clearly come to
learn from my own struggles with forming
new habits and breaking old ones but
regardless of the distance differences
and distinctions it's important to know
that we are all in this together as a
society if you're more happy productive
and successful then just buy like a
connective karma for us living on the
same planet that will increase the
chance of my life being happy more
productive and successful we are all in
this together so help each other out
pull each other up and have empathy for
those that are struggling the most
because as one of my guests said to me
on this podcast this year
the truth is when we think about that
person in our life that's struggling
with a habit if you were them if you had
walked their path in their life and you
had their DNA
the truth is you'd be doing exactly the
same thing so the best way to
demonstrate your gratitude for being
more fortunate in whatever subjective
regard that you might be
is to lift up those who aren't
I wish you all the luck in the world for
achieving your goals this year and in
the spirit of the sixth bonus Rule and
because I always end this podcast with a
question here's my very binary parting
yes or no question to you that hopes to
use the force of the question Behavior
effect
to help you achieve some of your habits
my parting question
is are you going to achieve your goals
this year
yes
oh no
thank you
quick one this episode is brought to you
by Mercedes-Benz who recently got in
touch to support the driver CEO I'm
becoming quite the fan of electric cars
and of course a huge fan of
Mercedes-Benz I have one of my own the
Mercedes-Benz luxury electric range
known as Mercedes EQ is at the very
Forefront of this industry which is what
really stood out to me if you're looking
for a business car the sustainability
credentials economic benefits General
convenience and high levels of luxury
which everybody knows Mercedes-Benz 4
and they're all electric cars are truly
groundbreaking in terms of features
their next Generation technology across
the range is second to none for example
there's intuitive mbux technology with
AI that learns your behavior and keeps
you connected to the things that matter
to you not to mention all Mercedes EQ
cars offer exemption from the ultra low
emission Zone charge and London
congestion charge so if like me you're
really excited about all things electric
cars and if you haven't checked out the
Mercedes EQ range then search
Mercedes-Benz Fleet to see how they can
take your business to the next level
could you do me a favor and my team here
a favor which is hit that subscribe
button we're approaching 1 million
subscribers and when we hit 1 million
subscribers we've been working for many
months to do something very big in which
you're all invited to
I'll reveal that when we hit a million
subscribers thank you
[Music]